The Magic School Bus is an American edutainment media franchise which includes a book series, TV adaptations, a streaming series, and various video games. Each of the stories within the franchise focuses on the antics of the fictional elementary school teacher, Ms. Valerie Frizzle, and her class (with Carlos, Keesha, Phoebe, Arnold, Tim, Ralphie, Dorothy Ann, and Wanda) who board a "magic school bus", which takes them on field trips to unusual times and locations, such as the Cretaceous Period, outer space, and inside a human body.[1]

History
The first medium that was developed from this franchise was the Magic School Bus book series. Craig Walker, vice-president and senior editorial director at Scholastic Co., stated that the concept began with the idea of combining science with fictional stories, and Joanna Cole (who had written both science and humor before) and Bruce Degen were then approached with creating such a series. Walker also explains that his own memories of school field trips and of a teacher he had once, served as further inspiration.[2] The first book, The Magic School Bus at the Waterworks, was published in 1986.[3][4]

Cole and Degen started a new series called Ms. Frizzle's Adventures in 2001, which teaches social studies, eventually producing three books in that series. Microsoft Home began publishing Magic School Bus software in 1994, the same year The Magic School Bus concept was also adapted into an animated television series of the same name by Scholastic Entertainment along Canadian animation studio Nelvana. The series premiered on PBS in September 10, 1994 as the network's first series with complete animation, with musician Little Richard performing its theme song.[5] In 1997, The Magic School Bus was picked up by Fox Kids Network to become part of their after-school block. The Network's after-school block had been receiving major flack due to the lack of educational values and The Magic School Bus was seen as a positive sign of a pivot towards an obligation of providing educational programming for children.[6]

Scholastic Entertainment president Deborah Forte says that adapting the books into an animated series was an opportunity to help kids "learn about science in a fun way".[7] Around that time, Forte had been hearing concern from parents and teachers about how to improve science education for girls and minorities.[7] As noted by Marcel LaFollette, "accomplished women were exceptions in a universe of male luminaries" when it came to science television.[8]: 185  Ms. Valerie Frizzle, the magic school teacher, was the closest approximation to an expert female host.[9][8]: 183, 185–195  She was voiced by Lily Tomlin in the series.[10] The series was followed by another animated series, The Magic School Bus Rides Again, which premiered on Netflix in 2017.[11] A newer series, recently announced by Scholastic, is a CGI-reboot geared towards preschool age viewers. Even with no prospective release date, this reboot will feature a 3-D version of the Magic School Bus itself, named Albie in the series, as well as Ms. Frizzle, Liz the lizard, and a new group of 6 year-old children: Lily, Wyatt and Benny. This group will work together and explore many new adventures![12]

Scholastic Entertainment, the American Meteorological Society and Texan Children's Museum of Houston created a Scholastic's the Magic School Bus Kicks Up a Storm, a 2,600 sq ft (240 m2) traveling exhibit funded in part by the National Science Foundation, which premiered at the Children's Museum of Houston in 2003 (a copy of it opened in New Jersey the month after that).[13]

Educational impact
The Magic School Bus was one of many shows that was funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF). The criteria for funding required creators to gain the interest of learners while ensuring proper engagement and making an impact on their education. Their creations necessitated innovation, as that is the driving force of funds. With these funds, The Magic School Bus had the ability to share science with the world, encouraging engagement with fun stories and long-lasting inspiration of future interests.[14] With this, the franchise had the ability to draw children towards its stories, problem-solving and interesting nature, and became a cornerstone for curiosity.[15]

The Magic School Bus provides new ways for children to learn and process information. Rather than by means of research, the various television shows, games, and books are able ensure retention from fun stories and remarkable trips brought to them by Ms. Frizzle and her class. Providing children with engaging learning opportunities, like sitting in on all the fun with The Magic School Bus, provides them with the structure they need to thrive and the desire to learn more![16]

The franchise of The Magic School Bus provided educators with plenty of resources and curricula that combined science education with entertainment. With exciting stories and plenty of adventures, The Magic School Bus made it easier for young minds to absorb information, as the concepts within the lessons were accessible and fostered engagement. As The Magic School Bus is still used to be able to continue to enhance science education, the franchise remains relevant in many classrooms today.[17]