Percy Jackson & the Olympians is a fantasy novel series by American author Rick Riordan. The first book series in his Camp Half-Blood Chronicles, the novels are set in a world with the Greek gods in the 21st century. The series follows the protagonist, Percy Jackson, a young demigod who must prevent the Titans, led by Kronos, from destroying the world.

The first three books were published in the United States by Miramax Books before they were folded into Hyperion Books; that house published the remaining books. All the books were published in the United Kingdom by Penguin Books. Four supplementary books, along with graphic novel versions of the first five books, have also been released. By January 2022, the books had sold more than 180 million copies worldwide, making the series one of the best-selling of all time.[1] Two sequel series, The Heroes of Olympus and The Trials of Apollo, follow. A follow-up trilogy in the series, The Senior Year Adventures, takes place after the events of The Heroes of Olympus and began in 2023 with The Chalice of the Gods.

The first book was adapted as a film titled Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief (2010). It was commercially successful but received mixed reviews from critics and the audience for its departure from the book. The first book was also adapted into a musical. The second book was adapted as a film titled Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters (2013), which also received mixed reviews. A TV series based on the novels premiered on Disney+ in 2023 to positive reviews.

Origins

Riordan at the Texas Book Festival in November 2007, doing publicity for Book 4
Rick Riordan has said that the development of these novels began when he was telling bedtime stories to his son, Haley Riordan. Haley had been diagnosed with ADHD and dyslexia.[2] Haley had been studying Greek mythology in second grade and asked his father to tell him stories based on Greek myths. When Riordan ran out of myths, his son suggested that he make up new stories based on the gods.

Riordan created the fictional character of Percy Jackson and a story about his traveling across the United States to recover Zeus's lightning bolt. Haley suggested his dad should make it a book, and Riordan wrote what became known as The Lightning Thief over the next year.[3]

After submitting his manuscript to his agent and editor, Riordan presented the book to a group of sixth, seventh, and eighth graders for their reactions. He gained their approval and, with their help, came up with the book title and the way Percy's sword works.[4] In 2004, the book was sold to Miramax Books for enough money that Riordan could quit his job and focus on writing full-time.[5] After it was published in 2005, it sold more than 1.2 million copies. The book was released in multiple editions, including hardcover, paperback, and audio editions.[6][7] It has been translated into multiple languages and published internationally.[8]

Plot
The original series is set in the mid-2000s and follows Perseus "Percy" Jackson, a 12-year-old boy who learns he is the son of the Greek god Poseidon. Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades had sworn not to father any more children after World War II, and as such, Poseidon did not interact with him as a child. The gods took that pledge because their children were too strong and had the potential to cause immense slaughter (in the universe's continuity, World War II was a conflict among their offspring). When Percy learns that he is at risk of being found by ferocious monsters because of his demigod status and strength, he also learns that Camp Half-Blood, a training facility on Long Island, New York, houses more demigods like him. He journeys with a new friend, Annabeth Chase, a daughter of Athena, and his best friend and traveling companion, Grover Underwood, a satyr who is his guardian. As the threat posed by the Titans grows, Percy begins to complete remarkable tasks, fulfill predictions, and engage in combat with and for the gods. He realizes that he can either contribute to the world's destruction or preservation.
